---
layout: post
title: Young Millennials Think Older Millennials Are Pathetic
shortTitle: Young Millennials 
date:   2015-11-13
category: business
tags: [weird]
image: young1.jpg
---
- __Young Millennials are Millennials born after 1990, who entered college
  after the beginning of the 2008 financial crisis__
- __Studies have shown that there are significant differences between Young
  Millennials and older Millennials__
- __Many Young Millennials are disgusted by the stereotypes associated with
  older Millennials, and wish to distance themselves__

*By [Rosemary Wilcox](https://www.facebook.com/rosemarypwilcox)*

![A Young Millennial woman at a Georgia Institute of Technology career
fair.]({{site.url }}/watermarked/young1.jpg)

"Being associated with Millennials is so embarrassing," says Melissa, a
third-year student at the Georgia Institute of Technology.  It's late October,
and Melissa and her friends are at a campus bar discussing their summer
internship prospects.  Most in the group are already talking to recruiters at
top companies in their chosen field.

"In so many TV shows and stuff, there's this idea that our generation is really
incompetent and unrealistic," says Anton, Melissa's boyfriend, or 'bae', as she
calls him.  "But I don't think that applies to people like us, who are still in
college.  We're different, I think." 

>### "Being associated with Millennials is so embarrassing."

This statement echoes claims made by other young Millennials and the marketing
professionals that study them.  A number of breathless articles in publications
like Elle, Forbes and the New York Times have even proclaimed a "generational
divide" between younger and older Millennials.   But the divide between younger
and older Millennials is more than manufactured hype: pollsters focused on the
upcoming primary elections have discovered striking statistical differences
between the two age groups.

![A chart showing the differences between Young and older Millennials from
Elle.com]({{site.url }}/watermarked/young2.jpg)

If September 11th was the defining disaster of the older Millennial cohort, the
2008 Financial Crisis was the defining moment for Young Millennials.  During
their formative late teen years, Young Millennials witnessed the crash of a
housing bubble that few even realized existed.   Their parents, many of whom
participated in half-baked, abortive attempts at revolutionary culture during
the 70's and 80's, gave Young Millennials pragmatic advice about preparing for a
career in a difficult economy.  

Instead of growing up during a period of hysterical American exceptionalism,
Young Millennials grew up in a time where dealing with economic and foreign
policy realities finally became unavoidable.  The failure of the War on Terror
and the financial crisis firmly reminded Americans that the 'American Century'
was over.

>### But the divide between younger and older Millennials is more than manufactured hype: pollsters focused on the upcoming primary elections have discovered striking statistical differences between the two age groups.

One portrait of Young Millennials has emerged that focuses on the goal-oriented,
intense, and pre-professional nature of the group.  "We are especially impressed
to see how Millennial teens are resiliently and optimistically responding to
adversity and preparing to win in the game of life," said Stephen Friedman,
President of MTV.  

Over the last half decade, popular and alternative culture has shifted to
reflect the changing Millennial mindset.  Indie rock, pop punk, and the poppy
hip hop tracks of the early 00's are gone, replaced by trap, EDM, and aggressive
superstars like Taylor Swift, Nicki Minaj, and Kanye West v2.0.  According to
the editor of a lifestyle branding company, Young Millennials are more likely to
understand "irony and identity crossover", due to growing up in a culturally
saturated Internet environment.  

Aspirational movies and TV shows like "The Social Network", "Gossip Girl",
"Suits", "Girls", and "Mad Men" helped to craft a psyche keenly aware of unequal
distributions of wealth, happiness, and beauty.  Young Millennials grew up with
characters willing to sacrifice their own mental health and happiness for a
chance at success.  Perhaps for this reason, a [recent
study](https://www.ketchum.com/news/break-ranks-among-millennial-males-18-25-year-olds-are-new-traditionalists-finds-ketchum-study)
called Young Millennial males "New Traditionalists": Young Millennial males are
more likely than older Millennials to believe that men should be the
breadwinners, to believe that they're the "strong silent type", and less likely
to be okay with sharing vulnerabilities.

The idea of the Young Millennial as goal-oriented and pre-professional is far
from universal, however.  Another prominent face is the Young Millennial "social
justice warrior".  


Young Millennials are [more likely to support highly
polarized](http://www.marketwatch.com/story/why-millennials-are-supporting-donald-trump-and-bernie-sanders-2015-11-09)
candidates like Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump, over more moderate candidates
like Hillary Clinton and Jeb Bush.  


Critiques of older Millennials are often gender-specific.  Terms like like 'bro'
and 'manchild' have emerged to describe underachieving Millennial men.  These
terms target the supposed inability of Millennial men to uphold American
standards of masculinity and independence.  More recently, new media
professionals like Gaby Dunn (b. 1988) and Alan Henson (b.  1988) have
popularized words like "fuckboy" and "softboy", which are focused on men who use
privilege and manipulation to extract sexual Millennial male "gold diggers".

Something about Melissa.
